---
layout: post
title: memes
---

A central idea I want to explore is that ideas (as broadly construed as possible) exist in some form outside of the individual, in the greater social sphere, but they interact and flourish within our minds. I will continue to use biological metaphors, but only as an evokative, rather than explanatory device. I am a physicist, and I believe that the patterns (and metapatterns) of nature are woven from simple elements, so an analogy like this stands a good chance to be formalizable. I have always disliked analogies as far as they are used by popular science writers to explain physics concepts, because they do not take care to delineate where the analogy holds and where it breaks down. I will do the best I can to avoid this.

Since the advent of communication, the Earth has been inhabited by informational entities as well as biological organisms. These informational entities, which after Dawkins I will call memes, are rather like viruses. They require a host brain (or computer) to survive and reproduce. "Reproduction" can occur along any channel of communication with enough bandwidth to convey the meme.

The fundamental question which must then be addressed is whether any thought we have in our head can really be conveyed with any fidelity to another person. If there is such a limit, shouldn't such memes, as they are passed around the social sphere, only be considered the "seeds" of ideas, which then take on a life of their own in our mind?

It seems like something in the middle is true. Those seeds, once germinated, are not put away in a nursery but are immediately thrown into the jungle of all our other thoughts and ideas, and are often bounced back and forth between individuals until some consensus on the idea is reached.

It's this social-reinforcement (sometimes called the echo chamber) which serves to amplify certain aspects of an idea, until the meme as it exists outside the individual, is matured.
